Hochschulschriften / Wien als Drehscheibe internationaler Geheim- und Nachrichtendienste im Kalten Krieg

In my diploma thesis I will try to find out which reasons made Vienna such an important hub for international espionage during the cold war and why this city is even sometimes called "spycapital". Before beginning, there are several problems with archival restrictions. There is a single chapter processing just this problem. Later on, historical traditions are processed. Even before the twenthiest century Vienna was a favourite playground for spies. But the spy cases where at their culmination after World War II. Austria was occupied by the Allied Forces. Austria was divided into four zones, one for the United States, one for the United Kingdom, one for France and one for the Soviet Union. But in Vienna on the contrary to the rest of the country and also to Berlin, there was a fifth one, an international zone. So the Austrian case differed from the German one. During the occupation there was a changing in the paradigms. In Austria the Cold War startet very early and the intelligence services startet their own clandestine war. Austria was a border country beetween the blocks. Vienna was also called the "shooting gallery" at that time. Austria was not just the arena, Austrians also were actors. They were informants and sometimes also victims. During the occupation, the Soviet forces arrested many Austrians and killed at least 104 of them after they had been condemned guilty. After 1955 Austria became a sovereign state again. The never ending neutrality offered good conditions for spies serving in Austria. They used especially Vienna as a gate, as a springboard into the East and West. One year after the "Staatsvertrag" there was the Hungarian revolution and in the year 1968 there was the "Prager Frühling" revolution. Two crises on the border of Austria. As the law regulations had never been really strict spies wanted to work in Austria. Even after the Cold War 1991 those spies refused to leave Vienna. They are still there, but nowadays there are new targets.
